# `usdt`

Dust your Rust with USDT probes.

## Overview

`usdt` exposes statically-defined [DTrace probes][1] to Rust code. Users write a _provider_
definition, in either the D language or directly in Rust code. The _probes_ of the provider
can then be compiled into Rust code that fire the probes. These are visible via the `dtrace`
command-line tool.

There are three mechanisms for converting the D probe definitions into Rust.

1. A `build.rs` script
2. A function-like procedural macro, `usdt::dtrace_provider`.
3. An attribute macro, `usdt::provider`.

The generated code is the same in all cases, though the third provides a bit more flexibility
than the first two. See [below](#serializable-types) for more details, but briefly, the third
form supports probe arguments of any type that implement [`serde::Seralize`][2]. These different
versions are shown in the crates `probe-test-{build,macro,attr}` respectively.

> Note: This crate uses inline assembly to work its magic.  That feature has been stable as of Rust
1.59.  Any project using `usdt` prior to that must build with a nightly toolchain and enable the
`asm` feature.  See the [notes](#notes) for a discussion.

## Example

The `probe-test-build` binary crate in this package implements a complete example, using the
build-time code generation.

The starting point is a D script, called `"test.d"`. It looks like:

```d
provider my_provider {
	probe start_work(uint8_t);
	probe stop_work(char*, uint8_t);
};
```

This script defines a single provider, `test`, with two probes, `start` and `stop`,
with a different set of arguments. (Integral primitive types, pointers to
integral types, and `&str`s are currently supported. Note that `char*` is used
to indicate Rust-style UTF-8 strings. If you'd like a byte array, use `uint8_t*`
or `int8_t*`.)

This provider definition must be converted into Rust code, which can be done in a simple
build script:


```rust
use usdt::Builder;

fn main() {
	Builder::new("test.d").build().unwrap();
}
```

This generates a file in the directory `OUT_DIR` which contains the generated Rust macros
that fire the probes. Unless it is changed, this file is named the same as the provider
definition file, so `test.rs` in this case.

Using the probes in Rust code looks like the following, which is in `probe-test-build/src/main.rs`.

```rust
//! An example using the `usdt` crate, generating the probes via a build script.
#![feature(asm)]
#![cfg_attr(target_os = "macos", feature(asm_sym))]

use std::thread::sleep;
use std::time::Duration;

use usdt::register_probes;

// Include the Rust implementation generated by the build script.
include!(concat!(env!("OUT_DIR"), "/test.rs"));

fn main() {
    let duration = Duration::from_secs(1);
    let mut counter: u8 = 0;

    // NOTE: One _must_ call this function in order to actually register the probes with DTrace.
    // Without this, it won't be possible to list, enable, or see the probes via `dtrace(1)`.
    register_probes().unwrap();

    loop {
        // Call the "start_work" probe which accepts a u8.
        my_provider::start_work!(|| (counter));

        // Do some work.
        sleep(duration);

        // Call the "stop_work" probe, which accepts a &str and a u8.
        my_provider::stop_work!(|| ("the probe has fired", counter));

        counter = counter.wrapping_add(1);
    }
}
```

Note that the `#![feature(asm)]` attribute is required. As of Rust 1.58.0-nightly (2021-10-29),
the `asm_sym` feature is required on macOS, so it may be placed in a call to `cfg_attr`, or
included in any case. If you're developing a library, this is an unfortunate Rubicon -- you
must choose to support compilers before that version or after, but there is no method by which
compilers before _and_ after may be supported.

One can also see that the Rust code is included directly using the `include!` macro. The probe
definitions are converted into Rust macros, in a module named by the provider, and with macro
named by the probe. In our case, the the first probe is converted into a macro
`my_provider::start_work!`.

> IMPORTANT: It's important to note that the application _must_ call `usdt::register_probes()`
in order to actually register the probe points with DTrace. Failing to do this will not impact
the application's functionality, but it will be impossible to list, enable, or otherwise see the
probes with the `dtrace(1)` tool without this.

We can see that this is hooked up with DTrace by running the example and listing the expected
probes by name.

```bash
$ cargo +nightly run --features asm
```

And in another terminal, list the matching probes with:

```bash
$ sudo dtrace -l -n my_provider*:::
   ID   PROVIDER            MODULE                          FUNCTION NAME
 2865  test14314  probe-test-build _ZN16probe_test_build4main17h906db832bb52ab01E [probe_test_build::main::h906db832bb52ab01] start_work
 2866  test14314  probe-test-build _ZN16probe_test_build4main17h906db832bb52ab01E [probe_test_build::main::h906db832bb52ab01] stop_work
 ```

## Probe arguments

One can see that the probe macros are called with closures, rather than with the probe
arguments directly. This has two purposes.

First, it indicates that the probe arguments may not be evaluated. DTrace generates
"is-enabled" probes for defined probe, which is a simple way to check if the probe has
currently been enabled. The arguments are only unpacked if the probe is enabled, and
so users _must not_ rely on side-effects. The closure helps indicate this.

The second point of this is efficiency. Again, the arguments are not evaluated if the
probe is not enabled. The closure is only evaluated internally _after_ the probe is
verified to be enabled, which avoid the unnecessary work of argument marshalling if
the probe is disabled.

## Procedural macro version

The procedural macro version of this crate can be seen in the `probe-test-macro` example,
which is nearly identical to the above example. However, there is no build.rs script,
so in place of the `include!` macro, one finds the procedural macro:

```rust
dtrace_provider!("test.d");
```

This macro generates the same macros as seen above, but does at the time the source
itself is compiled. This may be easier for some use cases, as there is no build script.
However, procedural macros have downsides. It can be difficult to understand their
internals, especially when things fail. Additionally, the macro is run on every compile,
even if the provider definition is unchanged. This may be negligible for small provider
definitions, but users may see a noticeable increase in compile times when many probes
are defined.

## Serializable types

As described above, the three forms of defining a provider a _nearly_ equivalent. The
only distinction is in the support of types implementing [`serde::Serialize`][2]. This uses
DTrace's [JSON functionality][3] -- Any serializable type is serialized to JSON with
[`serde_json::to_string()`][4], and the string may be unpacked and inspected in DTrace
scripts with the `json` function. For example, imagine we have the type:

```rust
#[derive(serde::Serialize)]
pub struct Arg {
    val: u8,
    data: Vec<String>,
}
```

and a probe definition:

```rust
#[usdt::provider]
mod my_provider {
    use crate::Arg;
    fn my_probe(_: &Arg) {}
}
```

Values of type `Arg` may be used in the generated probe macros. In a DTrace script, one can
look at the data in the argument like:

```
dtrace -n 'my_probe* { printf("%s", json(copyinstr(arg0), "ok.val")); }' # prints `Arg::val`.
```

The `json` function also supports nested objects and array indexing, so one could also do:

```
dtrace -n 'my_probe* { printf("%s", json(copyinstr(arg0), "ok.data[0]")); }' # prints `Arg::data[0]`.
```

See the `probe-test-attr` example for more details and usage.

### Serialization is fallible

Note that in the above examples, the first key of the JSON blob being accessed is `"ok"`. This
is because the `serde_json::to_string` function is fallible, returning a `Result`. This is mapped
into JSON in a natural way:

- `Ok(_) => {"ok": _}`
- `Err(_) => {"err": _}`

In the error case, the [`Error`][serde-json-error] returned is formatted using its `Display`
implementation. This isn't an academic concern. It's quite easy to build types that successfully
compile, and yet fail to serialize at runtime, even with types that `#[derive(Serialize)]`. See
[this issue][serde-runtime-fail] for details.

## A note about registration

Note that the `usdt::register_probes()` function is called at the top of main in the above
example. This method is required to actually register the probes with the DTrace kernel
module. This presents a quandary for library developers who wish to instrument their
code, as consumers of their library may forget to (or choose not to) call this function.
There are potential workarounds to this problem (init-sections, other magic), but each
comes with significant tradeoffs. As such the current recommendation is:

> Library developers are encouraged to re-export the `usdt::register_probes` (or a
function calling it), and document to their users that this function should be called to
guarantee that probes are registered.

## Notes

The `usdt` crate requires [inline asm][inline-asm], a feature only stabilized as of Rust 1.59.
Prior to that version, a nightly toolchain was required to import the feature.  For legacy
convenience reasons, the crate contains also an empty, no-op implementation, which generates all the
same probe macros, but with empty bodies (thus not requiring inline asm).  This may be selected by
passing the `--no-default-features` flag when building the crate, or by using `default-features =
false` in the [`[dependencies]` table][feature-deps] of one's `Cargo.toml`.

Library developers may use `usdt` as an optional dependency, gated by a feature, for example
named `usdt-probes` or similar. This feature would imply the `usdt/asm` feature, but the `usdt`
crate could be used with the no-op implementation by default. For example, your `Cargo.toml`
might contain

```
[dependencies]
usdt = { version = "*", optional = true, default-features = false }

# ... later

[features]
usdt-probes = ["usdt/asm"]
```

This allows users to opt into probes if they are using a suitably new toolchain, or and older
nightly with the `asm` feature enabled on their project.

### The Rust `asm` feature

On toolchains prior to 1.59, inline asm was [not available][asm-issue] without the feature being
enabled.  This applies to code _calling_ the probe macros, in addition to `usdt` where they are
implemented.  Those generated probe macros must be in a module that is either built with a >=1.59
toolchain or where the `feature(asm)` configuration is present.  On MacOS where the linker is
involved in USDT probe creation, the `asm_sym` feature is required, making use of a nightly
compiler required there.

#### Toolchain versions and the `asm_sym` feature

In addition, the `asm` feature was [recently][asm-feature-flags] broken out into several more
fine-grained features. Though it's great that inline assembly is being stabilized, a downside
of this that an additional feature flag is required on macOS platforms, `asm_sym`. This can be
included just on that platform, e.g., with `#![cfg_attr(target_os = "macos", feature(asm_sym))]`,
or unconditionally on all platforms.

The addition of this new feature presents an unfortunate problem. It is no longer possible to
compile the `usdt` crate (or any crate defining probes) with a toolchain from before that feature
was added _and_ after its addition. In the former case, we'd get errors about an unknown feature
should we include the `asm_sym` feature, and we'd get errors about functionality behind a feature
gate from later compilers should we omit the feature.

## References

[1]: https://illumos.org/books/dtrace/chp-usdt.html#chp-usdt
[2]: https://docs.rs/serde/1.0.130/serde/trait.Serialize.html
[3]: https://sysmgr.org/blog/2012/11/29/dtrace_and_json_together_at_last/
[4]: https://docs.rs/serde_json/1.0.68/serde_json/fn.to_string.html
[serde-json-error]: https://docs.serde.rs/serde_json/error/struct.Error.html
[serde-runtime-fail]: https://github.com/serde-rs/serde/issues/1307
[inline-asm]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/72016
[feature-deps]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/features.html#dependency-features
[asm-issue]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/72016
[asm-feature-flags]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/90348
